Once around, Alter, one of my favorite
stars in the summer sky. Alter is the
brightest star in the constellation of
Aquilla, the eagle, 12th brightest of
all the stars in the night sky,
magnitude 0.7. And the name comes from
the translation of the flying eagle. The
rest of the stars in the constellation
not so bright, a little bit hard to
find. We can always find Alter because
it's one corner of the summer triangle.
The other two being Vega and Denb. And
that was a asterism made up and
popularized by Sir Patrick Moore and by
Ha Ray in the United States. Very useful
for navigating your way around the sky
in the summer. Now, Alter itself is one
of the sun's near neighbors, and this is
why it appears so bright. It's one of
the brighter stars within 20 light years
of the sun at just 16.7 light years away
from us. That puts it inside what's
called the Gcloud. That also contains
the Alpha Centuri system. And the sun is
heading that way. It will enter the
G-Cloud from the local cloud that it's
in at the moment. The local interstellar
cloud, the LIC is that yellow region
with the sun in it. And in about 2,000
years time, we will leave the local
cloud and enter the G cloud. The local
cloud itself is actually moving
laterally across the direction of the
travel of the sun. So, we're both moving
and the sun will exit in about 2,000
years
time.
Now, the G-Cloud is a relatively low
density. It's 1/3 of the density of
material of the local cloud. And that
works out to be 0.1 hydrogen atoms for
every cubic cm. So, you need 10 cubic cm
to gather up one atom in the Gcloud.
That's pretty low. Um, but it's three
times higher than that in the local
cloud and we are traveling through that
at the moment and as I say we will drop
out of it at some point in about 2,000
years time. The LIC and the G-Cloud are
both part of a much larger structure a
thousand light years across in the Orion
arm of the Milky Way galaxy. And that's
called the local bubble. And here the
density is 10 times lower
0.05 atoms per cubic cm. So uh in fact
the G-Cloud is 20 times the density and
the LIC where the sun is now three times
more even than that. And this is uh
quite an amazing structure. The average
density around the whole of the Milky
Way is about 10 times higher than this
local bubble.
So, Alter itself is a main sequence
star, an Aclass star, hotter and bigger
and more massive than the sun. The mass
is worked out to be
1.86 times our own star and a larger
radius and 11 times the power output.
uh as you raise the mass of a star, it
tends to raise the power output
according to a rule which has a 2.5
power in it. So 1.86 to the power 2.5.
Um if you think you can work that out
for yourself, but the result is it alter
is 11 times brighter than the sun.
spectrum shows a very strong peak in the
blue end, the high energy end
corresponding to a high temperature and
those lovely absorption lines
corresponding in the main to hydrogen in
the atmosphere in the outer layers of
altar characteristic of a main sequence
star. What's unusual about Alair is just
how fast it spins.
The sun takes 26 days to rotate on its
axis. Alter just 8 hours. And the speed
at the equator 286
kilometers/s that works out to be 67% of
the breakup speed. So the uh centrifugal
force if you want to call it that is 2/3
of the strength of gravity at the
equator. um and that is making it highly
oblate and the image on the right is
actually a representation of real data
from a number of different
intererometers and Alter is one of the
few stars that we have been able to
photograph the surface
of so 20% fatter across the pole um
across the equator than it is at the
poles and also the spin axis is tilted
at 60째 to our line of
sight. Now, that spin creates a
phenomenon that is sometimes called
gravity darkening. And we have a
hypothetical star at the top here. It's
perfectly spherical when it's not
rotating and as it speeds up becomes
more and more oblate, more and more um
ellipsoidal. And the result of that is
that the equatorial regions see a
greater centrifugal effect, moving mass
away from the spin axis, lowering the
pressure in the gas, making it less
dense and cooler. And the poles are
hotter. And so in fact, Alta has a
temperature of
6,780 Kelvin at the equator surface, but
a much hotter
8,620 at the poles. Nearly 2,000째 hotter
just because of this gravity darkening.
And in fact, a uh more mathematical
treatment of it is called Vonzopel's
theorem. And this takes into account the
centrifugal effect of the rotation uh
using the radius row and the uh m omega
squar where omega is the angular
rotation rate and you get the force
acting on a particle at the edge which
is effectively counteracting gravity. I
know that centrifugal force isn't a real
force. It's actually the centrial force
etc. But for the purposes of this
calculation, this is the easy way to
treat it. And then you can work out um
that that fights against gravity and
reduces the overall temperature. And Bon
Zip's theorem shows us that the
effective temperature is proportional to
the fourth root of the effective
gravity. And of course that flows from
the Stefan Boltzman law as well.
So Alterara is also a little bit
variable only tiny variations of a few
thousandths of a magnitude but with
regular periods of under two hours it is
changing backwards and forwards and that
makes it an example of a delta scutey
variable. So what about uh its origins
in its age? Well, early estimates were
that it was 1 billion years
old,
but you can see it on the middle of the
Herzbrung Russell diagram there between
Sirius and Proion. And in that position,
you can do some maths and say, well,
with 1.86 solar masses and 11 times the
power output, a simple estimate tells
you if you got 1.86 86 times the fuel
and you burn it 11 times faster, you're
going to run out in 750 million years.
So being a billion years old is a bit
optimistic. And indeed, most recently,
estimates have worked out at under a 100
million years, just 88 million years. So
only 2% as old as the sun, which uh
makes it very very young indeed.
As far as we know, we can't find any
planets around it at this stage. And
with that sub 100 millionyear age,
perhaps the planets that it may or may
not be um in possession of are still
small and are still growing. We don't
know. But one way or another, it does
seem like there hasn't been very long
for planets to grow, to cool down, to
form rocky surfaces and acquire oceans
and do all the things that you need to
do to trigger the evolution of life. And
so despite that, the mention in sci-fi,
in Star Trek and elsewhere is pretty
common uh perhaps because it's near to
the sun and perhaps because actually um
the estimates were that it was much
older up to a billion years when those
sci-fi stories were being written. Um
and the new news is that it's just way
too young for that. Um, but I do
remember Altair being the star around
which the hypothetical planet Alter 4
orbited in the Forbidden Planet. So, one
of my favorite sci-fi movies of all time
with Dr. MorbiiUs and uh Robbie the
robot and the power of the ancient
civilization called The Krell.
Absolutely wonderful sci-fi movie. Um,
and uh, if it's on again, I'm pretty
sure I'm going to watch it just for the
fun of it. Um, and uh, well, wouldn't it
be interesting if there was a planet
Altera 4 in the end? We just hadn't
discovered any yet. Perhaps because of
that axial
tilt. And I'll just leave you with a
shot from the uh, Forbidden Planet there
where I think the quote is, "This
spaceship arranges its own eclipses."
So, a hypothetical planet passing in
front of and blocking the light from
Alter. I hope you've enjoyed that one
and we'll be back with more trips once
around other objects later on.